Being critical is a vital component of the academic process
and when employed it will result in you gaining
a thorough and deeper understanding of your discipline.
You will need to use critical thinking strategies when you research and create your assignments.
So, why do you need to do this?
Critical thinking is all about thoroughly researched and well thought through arguments
avoiding preconceptions and bias.
For example, you would need to avoid
avoid basing work on your personal opinions
about a brand, political ideals or a company.
Being a student is about learning how to think, not what to think.
Critical thinking shapes your own values
and attitudes through a process of consideration and discussion.
Developing these skills will be critical to your success.
What does this mean?
Being critical does not just mean finding fault.
It means assessing evidence from a variety of sources and making reasoned conclusions.
Critical thinking will support you to:
Evaluate evidence and arguments for and against views, opinions and theories.
Consider issues carefully.
Explore where the viewpoint leads, what the conclusions are and if they are logical.
Examine in detail identifying how arguments relate to each other.
Check for accuracy and identify flaws in reasoning,
evidence or conclusions.
Compare the same issue from different authors’ opinions.
Explain why different authors arrived at different conclusions.
Be able to argue why one set of opinions is preferable to another.
Look for hidden assumptions.
Before you start researching a question or topic, ask yourself the following questions:
What do you want to get out of your research?
What are your expectations?
What is your goal?
What are your limits?
What do you think the main arguments of the text will be?
Learning to think critically and critically evaluate work
is a skill that needs practice
and does not always come naturally to everyone.
Help and support is always available at The University of Manchester.
You may find the resource below a useful place to start.